---
layout: post
title: JotForm 4.0  — Ege Gorgulu
prettyTitle: JotForm 4.0
selector: jotform4
permalink: /works/jotform
role: Designer
type: Progressive App
desc: Online form builder, redesigned for the responsive web.
cover: bg.jpg
imgPath: /assets/img/jotform4/
hidden: true
---

# JotForm 4.0

## Re-thinking how web forms are created online

JotForm is an online form builder, allowing more than 2 million people to collect information and build better workflows for their companies, as well as accepting payments online.

### The Problem

JotForm is a vast product that serves a huge variety of customers, so we started by interviewing users and identifying several archetypes to create various problem statements. After a while a pattern started to emerge and we arrived at an all-encompassing problem statement:

> When I need to collect information, there are usually a lot of steps that require me to personally deal with them. I want to automate these processes and spend my time on something else.

Old version of JotForm could already automate a lot of tasks and the forms did actually help people save a lot of time. 

However, after conducting a ton of usability tests and tracking various metrics across the board for quite a while, it was evident that the experience of creating a form was mostly time consuming and not quick at all.

What's more, our analytics also pointed towards an increased interest from mobile users as well, receiveing almost 30% more traffic when compared to previous year. In the light if this, we conducted several street-level interviews to gauge interest in a form builder that you could use any where, any time and the responses showed that there was such a need in the market. 

One particular story that caught our attention was from an event organizer, who convinced us to make responsiveness a priority and go mobile-first:

> I was at a job fair as an employer and as soon as we set up shop at the event, the application form we prepared stopped working for some reason. We did not have any laptops with us, so we were stuck collecting applicant information throughout the whole day. 

Talking to potential and current users, we were overflowing with ideas about how to make their experience even more awesome and laid them on a impact vs. effort matrix to decide on a couple of features for the future. We decided on Colloboration, Offline Capability, Simplified Designer and Continuous Save as our main improvements for JotForm 4.0.

### Strategy

Our usability testing sessions had revealed that Discoverability and Findability was the most problematic areas, especially for new users, often causing people to miss important functionalty and get frustrated to the point of abandoning the product. 

These tests also revealed a myriad of small to medium sized usability issues and inconsistencies, often relating to using wrong type of questions for user input. 

These findings was the validation we needed to greenlight the project.

Through tracking user & form activity, we also discovered that nearly 30% of our customers would visit JotForm only every 2 months at best. 

This indicated that repeat-users would often need to re-learn the product and the high learning curve of the old version would prevent people from discovering other features they might need; ultimately limiting the value people could get out of our product and damaging customer retention.

Henceforth, we founded our design strategy on these 3 pillars: 

- Aim for a low barrier of entry and learning curve by increasing the discoverability and findability of features, as well as utilizing progressive disclosure.

- Achieve consistency through standardization of interaction patterns and creation of a UI Framework.

- Allow people to build forms anywhere, anytime so that creating forms can become an important part of the daily workflow, like spreadsheets or word processors.

Clearly tracking our progress was important to make sure that we were on the right track, so we decided on Times Spent on Tasks, Task Difficulty Ratings, Context-Specific Conversion Rates and overall NPS scores as our UX KPIs. We also defined Retention Rate as our main Business KPI.

### Kickoff & Elephants in a room

Obviously, planning is often easier than execution. Apart from the massive redesign, there was another elephant in the room: a legacy codebase built on an outdated framework.

Testing and iterating is our default mode of operation at JotForm. We're big on continous development and design. However, with a legacy codebase where filesizes reached 10K lines at times, this meant that we couldn't just jump right in and start developing a new product from scratch. 

~~Instead, we decided to divide the project into smaller fragments and conquer one by one, prioritizing and planning by number of features, density, and importance.~~

A roadmap was created, consisting of 16 different chunks of features varying at size, and one big-bad builder project, which is the core component that all smaller features would be connected to. 

~~A few of us had been following and experimenting with React.js for a while and had a great time working in it's component based architecture. It was chosen as our front-end framework for JotForm 4.0. ~~

It was decided that the development would start by working on the smaller 16 components first to test the waters since we, as a company, were somewhat inexperienced with React and the myriad of other frameworks surrounding it.

This worked nicely with our plans for design, as it allowed for some lee-way to start working on a UI kit and framework, aiming to ensure consistency between designers and speeding up the development process down the line.

### Baby Steps & Prototyping

Starting with the smaller components meant that there had to be a transitionary phase for our current product, as they were all parts of a form building process and we achieved this by basically hijackking the functionality from the old builder, showing new wizard designs laid on top of the old screen as a modal window.

While we all agreed that it was not the nicest method to handle such a change, one key benefit it offered us was the ability to simultaneously A/B test several components at once.

 the most wonderful thing happened and we started seeing an upwards trend on all the stats tracking new wizards.

The hardest part at this stage was striking a balance between the big number of features we offer and keeping the interfaces clutter-free. To solve this, we decided to practice the progressive disclosure principle as a our main driving force behind our interaction design decisions, information architecture and content strategy.




[Talk about designing the wizards, how you measured metrics and a/b tested the designs.]

[Talk about prototypes and hackathons]

[Talk about the soft launch, feedbacks and sprints]

[Talk about the successful launch]

[Mention form fields somewhere and why we decided to postpone them]









